7.2. Observed Impacts,
with Detection and Attribution
7.2.1. Food Production Systems

Formal detection of impacts requires that observed changes be compared to a clearly specified baseline that characterizes behavior in the absence of climate change (Chapter 18). For food production systems, the number and strength of non-climate drivers, such as cultivar improvement or increased use of irrigation and fertilizers in the case of crops, make defining a clear baseline extremely difficult. Most non-climatic factors are not very well characterized in terms of spatial and temporal distributions, and the relationships between these factors and specific outcomes of interest (e.g., crop or fish production) are often difficult to quantify.

Attribution of any observed changes to climate trends are further complicated by the fact that models linking climate and agriculture must, implicitly or explicitly, make assumptions about farmer behavior. In most cases, models implicitly assume that farming practices or technologies did not adjust in response to climate over the period of interest. This assumption can be defended in some cases based on ancillary data on practices, or based on small differences between using models with and without adaptation (Schlenker and Roberts, 2009). However, in some instances the relationship between climate conditions and crop production has been shown to change over time because of management changes, such as introduction of irrigation or changes in
crop varieties (Zhang et al, 2008; Liu et al., 2009; Sakurai et al, 2012).

7.2.1.1. Crop Production  

Many studies of cropping systems have estimated impacts of observed climate changes on crop yields over the past half century, although they typically do not attempt to compare observed yields to a counterfactual baseline, and thus are not formal detection and attribution studies. These studies employ both mechanistic and statistical approaches (Section 7.3.1), and estimate impacts by running the models with observed historical climate and then computing trends in modeled outcomes. Based on these studies, there is medium confidence that climate trends have negatively affected wheat and maize production for many regions (Figure 7-2) (medium evidence, high agreement). Because many of these regional studies are for major producers, and a global study (Lobell et al., 2011a) estimated negative impacts on these crops, there is also medium confidence for negative impacts on global aggregate production of wheat and maize. Effects on rice and soybean yields have been small in major production regions and globally (Figure 7-2) (medium evidence, high agreement). There is also high confidence that warming has benefitted crop production in some high-latitude regions, such as northeast China or the UK (Jaggard et al., 2007; Chen et al., 2010; Supit et al, 2010; Gregory and Marshall, 2012).

More difficult to quantify with models is the impact of very extreme events on cropping systems, as by definition these occur very rarely and models cannot be adequately calibrated and tested. Table 18-3 lists some notable extremes over the past decade, and the impacts on cropping systems. Despite the difficulty of modeling the impacts of these events, they clearly have sizable impacts (Sanchez et al. 2014) that are apparent immediately or soon after the event, and therefore not easily confused with effects of more slowly moving factors. For a subset of these events, climate research has evaluated whether anthropogenic activity has increased or decreased their likelihood (Table 18-3).

A sizable fraction of crop modeling studies were concerned with production for individual sites or provinces, spatial scales below which  the changes in climate conditions are attributable to anthropogenic activity (WGI AR5 Chapter 10). Similarly, most crop studies have focused on the past few decades, a time scale shorter than most attribution studies for climate. However, some focused on continental or global scales (Lobell and Field, 2007; You et al., 2009; Lobell et al., 2011a), at which trends in several climatic variables, including average summer temperatures, have been attributed to anthropogenic activity. In particular, global temperature trends over the past few decades are attributable to human activity (WGI AR5 Chapter 10), and the studies discussed above indicate that this warming has had significant impacts on global yield trends of some crops.

In general, little work in food production or food security research has focused on determining whether climate trends affecting agriculture can be attributed to anthropogenic influence on the climate system. However, as the field of climate detection and attribution proceeds to finer spatial and temporal scales, and as agricultural modeling studies expand to broader scales, there should be many opportunities to link climate and crop studies in the next few years. Importantly, climate attribution is increasingly documented not only for measures of average conditions over growing seasons, but also for extremes. For instance, Min et al. (2011) attributed changes in rainfall extremes for 1951-1999 to anthropogenic activity, and these are widely acknowledged as important to cropping systems (Rosenzweig et al., 2002). Frost damage is an important constraint on crop growth in many crops, including for various high-value crops, and significant reductions in frost occurrence since 1961 have been observed and attributed to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in nearly every region of the world (Zwiers et al, 2011; IPCC, 2012).

Increased frequency of unusually hot nights since 1961 are also attributable to human activity in most regions (WGI AR5 Chapter 10). These events are damaging to most crops, an effect that has been observed most commonly for rice yields (Peng et al., 2004; Wassmann et al., 2009; Welch et al., 2010) as well as rice quality (Okada et al., 2011). Extremely high daytime temperatures are also damaging and occasionally lethal to crops (Porter and Gawith, 1999; Schlenker and Roberts, 2009), and trends at the global scale in annual maximum daytime temperatures since 1961 have been attributed to GHG emissions (Zwiers et al., 2011). At regional and local scales, however, trends in daytime maximum are harder to attribute to GHG emissions because of the prominent role of soil moisture and clouds in driving these trends (Christidis et al., 2005; Zwiers et al., 2011).

In addition to effects of changes in climatic conditions, there are clear effects of changes in atmospheric composition on crops. Increase of atmospheric CO, by greater than 100 ppm since preindustrial times has virtually certainly enhanced water use efficiency and yields, especially for C; crops such as wheat and rice, although these benefits played a minor role in driving overall yield trends (Amthor, 2001; McGrath and Lobell, 2011).

Emissions of CO, often are accompanied by ozone (0;) precursors that have driven a rise in tropospheric O, that harms crop yields (Morgan et al., 2006; Mills et al., 2007; Section 7.3.2.1.2). Elevated 0, since preindustrial times has very likely suppressed global production of major crops compared to what they would have been without O, increases, with estimated losses of roughly 10% for wheat and soybean and 3 to 5% for maize and rice (Van Dingenen et al., 2009). Impacts are most severe over India and China (Van Dingenen et al., 2009; Avnery et al. 2011a,b), but are also evident for soybean and maize in the USA (Fishman et al., 2010).

7.2.1.2. Fisheries Production

The global average consumption of fish and other products from fisheries and aquaculture in 2010 was 18.6 kg per person per year, derived from a total production of 148.5 million tonnes, of which 86% was used for direct human consumption. The total production arose from contributions of 77.4 and 11.2 million tonnes respectively from marine and inland capture fisheries, and 18.1 and 41.7 million tonnes respectively from marine and freshwater aquaculture (FAO, 2012). Fisheries make particular contributions to food security and more than 90% of the people engaged in the sector are employed in small-scale fisheries, many of whom are found in the poorer countries of the world (Cochrane et al., 2011). The detection and attribution of impacts are as confounded in inland and marine fisheries as in terrestrial food production systems. Overfishing, habitat modification, pollution, and interannual to decadal climate variability can all have impacts that are difficult to separate from those directly attributable to climate change.

One of the best studied areas is the Northeast Atlantic, where the temperature has increased rapidly in recent decades, associated with a poleward shift in distribution of fish (Perry et al., 2005; Brander, 2007; Cheung et al., 2010, 2013). There is high confidence in observations of increasing abundance of fish species in the northern extent of their ranges while decreases in abundance have occurred in the southern part (Section 30.5.1.1.1). These trends will have mixed implications for fisheries and aquaculture with some commercial species negatively and others positively affected (Cook and Heath, 2005). There is a similar well-documented example in the oceans off southeast Australia with large warming trends associated with more southward incursion of the Eastern Australian Current, resulting in southward migration of marine species into the oceans around eastern Tasmania (robust evidence, high agreement; Last et al., 2011).

As a further example, coral reef ecosystems provide food and other resources to more than 500 million people and with an annual value of US$5 billion or more (Munday et al., 2008; Hoegh-Guldberg, 2011). More than 60% of coral reefs are considered to be under immediate threat of damage from a range of local threats, of which overfishing is the most serious (Burke et al., 2011; see also Box CC-CR) and the percentage under threat rises to approximately 75% when the effect of rising ocean temperatures is added to these local impacts (Burke et al., 2011). Wilson et al. (2006) demonstrated that declines in coral reef cover typically led to declines in abundance of the majority of fish species associated with coral reefs. There is high confidence that the availability of fish and invertebrate species associated with coral reefs that are important in many tropical coastal fisheries is very likely to be reduced (Section 30.6.2.1.2). Other examples around the world are described in Section 30.5.1.1.1.

These changes are impacting marine fisheries: a recent study that examined the composition of global fisheries catches according to the inferred temperature preferences of the species caught in fisheries found that there had been changes in the species composition of marine capture fisheries catches and that these were significantly related to changes in ocean temperatures (Cheung et al. 2013; Section 6.4.1.1). These authors noted that the relative contribution to catches by warmer water species had increased at higher latitudes while the contributions of subtropical species had decreased in the tropics. These changes have negative implications for coastal fisheries in tropical developing countries, which tend to be particularly vulnerable to climate change (Cheung et al., 2013; Sections 6.4.3, 7.5.1.1.2). 

There is considerably less information available on climate change impacts on fisheries and fishery resources in freshwater systems and aquaculture. Considerable attention has been given to the impacts of climate change in some African lakes but with mixed interpretations (Section 22.3.3.1.4). There is evidence that increasing temperature has reduced the primary productivity of Lake Tanganyika in East Africa and a study by O'Reilly et al. (2003) estimated that this would have led to a decrease of approximately 30% in fish yields. However, Sarvala et al. (2006) disagreed and concluded that observed decreases in the fish catches could be explained by changed fishery practices. There has been a similar difference of opinion for Lake Kariba, where Ndebele-Murisa et al. (2011) argued that a reduction in fisheries productivity had been caused by climate change while Marshall (2012) argued that the declines in fish catches can only have been caused by fishing. There is medium confidence that, in India, changes in a number of climate variables including an increase in air temperature, regional monsoon variation, and a regional increase in incidence of severe storms have led to changes in species composition in the River Ganga and to have reduced the availability of fish spawn for aquaculture in the river Ganga while having positive impacts on aquaculture on the plains through bringing forward and extending the breeding period of the majors carps (Vass et al., 2009).

7.2.1.3. Livestock Production

In comparison to crop and fish production, considerably less work has been published on observed impacts for other food production systems, such as livestock or aquaculture, and to our knowledge nothing has been published for hunting or collection of wild foods other than for capture fisheries. The relative lack of evidence reflects a lack of study in this topic, but not necessarily a lack of real-world impacts of observed climate trends. A study of blue-tongue virus, an important ruminant disease, evaluated the effects of past and future climate trends on transmission risk, and concluded that climate changes have facilitated the recent and rapid spread of the virus into Europe (Guis et al., 2012). Ticks that carry zoonotic diseases have also likely changed distribution as a consequence of past climate trends (Section 23.4.2).

7.2.2. Food Security and Food Prices

Food production is an important aspect of food security (Section 7.1), and the evidence that climate change has affected food production implies some effect on food security. Yet quantifying this effect is an extremely difficult task, requiring assumptions about the many non- climate factors that interact with climate to determine food security. There is thus limited direct evidence that unambiguously links climate change to impacts on food security.

One important aspect of food security is the prices of internationally traded food commodities (Section 7.1.3). These prices reflect the overall balance of supply and demand, and the accessibility of food for consumers integrated with regional to global markets. Although food prices gradually declined for most of the 20th century (FAO, 2009b) since AR4 there have been several periods of rapid increases in international food prices (Figure 7-3). A major factor in recent price changes has been increased crop demand, notably via increased use in biofuel production related both to energy policy mandates and oil price fluctuations (Roberts and Schlenker, 2010; Mueller et al., 2011; Wright, 2011). Yet fluctuations and trends in food production are also widely believed to have played a role in recent price changes, with recent price spikes often following climate extremes in major producers (Figure 7-3). Moreover, some of these extreme events have become more likely as a result of climate trends (Table 18-3). Domestic policy reactions can also amplify international price responses to weather events, as was the case with export bans announced by several countries since 2007 (FAO, 2008). In a study of global production responses to climate trends (Lobell et al, 2011a) estimated a price increase of 19% due to the impacts of temperature and precipitation trends on supply, or an increase of 6% once the beneficial yield effects of increased CO, over the study period were considered. Because the price models were developed for a period ending in 2003, these estimates do not account for the policy responses witnessed in recent years which have amplified the price responses to weather.