FIRST TEXT:
4.5.1

Projected Risks to Agriculture

AR5 concluded that overall irrigation water demand would increase by 2080, while the vulnerability of rain-fed agriculture will further increase (Jiménez Cisneros et al., 2014). SR1.5 concluded that both the food and the water sectors would be negatively impacted by global warming with higher risks at 2°C than at 1.5°C, and these risks could coincide spatially and temporally, thus increasing hazards, exposures and vulnerabilities across populations and regions (medium confidence). SR1.5 further reinforced AR5 conclusions in terms of projected crop yield reductions, especially for wheat and rice (high confidence), loss of livestock and increased risks for small-scale fisheries and aquaculture (medium confidence) (Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2018), conclusions which are further corroborated by SRCCL (Mbow et al., 2019).

Climate change impacts agriculture through various pathways (5.4 – Crop-based Systems), with projected yield losses of up to 32% by 2100 (RCP8.5) due to the combined effects of temperature and precipitation. Limiting warming could significantly reduce potential impacts (up 12% yield reduction by 2100 under RCP4.5) (Ren et al., 2018a). Though overall changes differ across models, regions and seasons, differences in impacts between 1.5°C and 2°C can also be identified (Ren et al., 2018a; Ruane et al., 2018; Schleussner et al., 2018). Globally, 11% (± 5%) of croplands are estimated to be vulnerable to projected climate driven water scarcity by 2050 (Fitton et al., 2019). Overall drought-driven yield loss is estimated to increase by 9–12% (wheat), 5.6–6.3% (maize), 18.1–19.4% (rice) and 15.1–16.1% (soybean) by 2071–2100, relative to 1961–2016 (RCP8.5) (Leng and Hall, 2019). In addition, temperature-driven increases in water vapor deficit could have additional negative effects, further exacerbating drought-induced plant mortality and thus impacting yields (Grossiord et al., 2020) (see also Cross-Chapter Box 1 in Chapter 5 of WGI report). Currently, global agricultural models do not fully differentiate crop responses to elevated CO2 under temperature and hydrological extremes (Deryng et al., 2016) and largely underestimate the effects of climate extremes (Schewe et al., 2019).

Flood-related risks to agricultural production are projected to increase over Europe, with a mean increase of expected annual output losses of approximately €11 million (at 1.5°C GWL); €12 million ( at 2°C GWL) and €15 million (at 3°C GWL) relative to the 2010 baseline (Koks et al., 2019). In parts of Asia, where flooding impacts on agriculture are already significant, projections indicate an increase in damage to area under paddy by up to 50% in Nepal, 16% in the Philippines, 55% in Indonesia, 23% in Cambodia and Vietnam and 13% in Thailand (2075– 2099 compared with 1979–2003; RCP8.5) (Shrestha et al., 2019a). Global crop water consumption of green water resources (soil moisture) is projected to increase by about 8.5% by 2099 relative to 1971–2000 as a result of climate drivers (RCP6.0), with additional smaller contributions by land use change (Huang et al., 2019) (Sections 4.4.1.3, 4.4.8). In India, a substantial increase in green and blue water consumption is projected for wheat and maize, with a slight reduction of blue water consumption for paddy fields (Mali et al., 2021). Temperate drylands, especially higher latitude regions, may become more suitable for rain-fed agriculture (Bradford et al., 2017). Locally and regionally, however, some of those areas with currently larger areas under rain-fed production, for example, in Europe, may become less suitable for rain-fed agriculture (Table 1 to 4.5.1) (Bradford et al., 2017; Shahsavari et al., 2019).

While global crop models and estimates of yield impacts often focus on major staple crops relevant for global food security, crops of high economic value are projected to become increasingly water dependent. For example, climate-driven yield increases for tea are projected for various tea-producing regions if no water limitations and full irrigation is assumed, but decreases in yields are projected under continued present-day irrigation assumptions (Beringer et al., 2020). Water-related impacts on global cotton production are highly dependent on the CO2 fertilization effect, with increases projected for higher CO2 concentration if no water limitations are implemented. However, substantial decreases in cotton production are projected if lower or no fertilization effects are accounted for due to increasing water limitations (Jans et al., 2018). Reductions in economically valuable crops will probably increase the vulnerability of population groups, especially small-holder farmers with limited response options (Morel et al., 2019).

To stabilize yields against variations in moisture availability, irrigation is the often the most common adaptation response (Section 4.6.2, Box 4.3). Projections indicate a potentially substantial increase in irrigation water requirements (Boretti and Rosa, 2019). Increasing agricultural water demand is driven by various factors, including population growth, increased irrigated agriculture, cropland expansion and higher demand for bio-energy crops for mitigation (Chaturvedi et al., 2015; Grafton et al., 2015; Turner et al., 2019; 4.7.6). Depending on underlying assumptions and the constraints on water resources implemented in the global agricultural models, irrigation water requirements are projected to increase two- to three-fold by the end of the century (Hejazi et al., 2014; Bonsch et al., 2015; Chaturvedi et al., 2015; Huang et al., 2019). While the combined effects of population and land use change as well as irrigation expansion account for the significant part of the projected increases in irrigation water demand by the end of the century, around 14% of the increase is directly attributed to climate change (RCP6.0) (Huang et al., 2019). With various degrees of water stress being experienced under current conditions and further changes in regional water availability projected, as well as continuing groundwater depletion as a consequence of over-abstraction for irrigation purposes (Sections 4.2.6 and 4.4.6), limitations to major irrigation expansion will occur in some regions, including South and Central Asia, the Middle East and parts of North and Central America (Grafton et al., 2015; Turner et al., 2019). Constraining projections of available irrigation water through consideration of environmental flow requirements further reduces the potential for irrigation capacity and expansion (Bonsch et al., 2015). Changes in land use and production patterns, for example, expansion of rain-fed production and increasing inter-regional trade, would be required to meet growing food demand while preserving environmental flow requirements, though this may increase local food security-related vulnerabilities (Cross-Chapter Box INTERREG in Chapter 16) (Pastor et al., 2014). Where climate impacts on yields are not a consequence of water limitations (mainly for C4 crops), irrigation cannot offset negative yield impacts (Levis et al., 2018).

Over 50% of the global lowlands equipped for irrigation will depend heavily on runoff contributions from the mountain cryosphere by 2041–2050 (SSP2–RCP6.0) and are projected to make unsustainable use of blue water resources (Viviroli et al., 2020). Projected changes in snowmelt patterns indicate that for all regions dependent on snowmelt for irrigation during warm seasons, alternative water sources will have to be found for up to 20% (at 2°C GWL) and up to 40% (at 4°C GWL) of seasonal irrigation water use, relative to current water use patterns (1986–2015) (Qin et al., 2020). Regional studies further corroborate these global findings (Biemans et al., 2019; Malek et al., 2020). Basins where such alternate sources are not available will face agricultural water scarcity.
Elevated CO2 concentrations play an important role in determining future yields in general and have the potential to beneficially affect plant water use efficiency (Deryng et al., 2016; Ren et al., 2018a; Nechifor and Winning, 2019). The elevated CO2 effects are projected to be most prominent for rain-fed C3 crops (Levis et al., 2018). Combined results from field experiments and global crop models show that CO2 fertilization could reduce consumptive water use by 4–17% (Deryng et al., 2016). To account for uncertainties, global agricultural models provide output with and without account for CO2 fertilization effects, though recent progress on reducing model uncertainty indicates that non-CO2 model runs may no longer be needed for adequate projections of yield impacts (Toreti et al., 2019).

Due to the complex interactions among determinants for livestock production, the future signal of water-related risks to this sector is unclear. Globally, 10% (± 5%) of pasture areas are projected to be vulnerable to climate-induced water scarcity by 2050 (Fitton et al., 2019). Water use efficiency gains through elevated CO2 concentrations have the potential to increase forage quantities, though effects of nutritional values are ambiguous (Augustine et al., 2018; Derner et al., 2018; Rolla et al., 2019). In addition, spatial shifts in temperature/ humidity regimes may shift suitable regions for livestock production, opening up new suitable areas for some regions or encouraging shifts in specific breeds better adapted to future climatic regimes (Rolla et al., 2019) (5.5 – Livestock Systems and 5.10 Mixed Systems). Projections of climate impacts on freshwater aquaculture are limited (5.9.3.1 – Projected Impacts; Inland freshwater and brackish aquaculture). In particular, in tropical regions, reductions in water availability, deteriorating water quality, and increasing water temperatures pose risks to terrestrial aquaculture, including temperature-related diseases and endocrine disruption (Kibria et al., 2017, Section 4.4.7). On the other hand, freshwater aquaculture in temperate and arctic polar regions may benefit from temperature increases with an extension of the fish-growing season (Kibria et al., 2017).
Global crop models, which provide the basis for most projections of agricultural risk, continue to have limitations in resolving water availability. For example they do not fully resolve the effects of elevated CO2 for changing water use efficiency (Durand et al., 2018), potentially overestimating drought impacts on maize yield (Fodor et al., 2017) and may underestimate limitations to further expansion of irrigation (Elliott et al., 2014; Frieler et al., 2017b; Winter et al., 2017; Jägermeyr and Frieler, 2018; Kimball et al., 2019; Yokohata et al., 2020a). 

In summary, agricultural water use is projected to increase globally due to cropland expansion and intensification and climate change induced changes in water requirements (high confidence). Parts of temperate drylands may experience increases in suitability for rain-fed production based on mean climate conditions; however, risks to rain-fed agriculture increase globally because of increasing variability in precipitation regimes and changes in water availability (high confidence). Water-related impacts on economically valuable crops will increase regional economic risks (medium evidence, high agreement). Regions reliant on snowmelt for irrigation purposes will be affected by substantial reductions in water availability (high confidence). 

5.2.2 Key Risks

Key risks in this chapter are grouped into those related to food security, food safety and dietary health, livelihoods of people in related sectors, and ecosystem services. Determining when a risk is considered severe is challenging to quantify because of the complexity of the food system, uncertainty about the effects, and ethical challenges.

Current levels of food insecurity are already high in some parts of the world and are often exacerbated by short-term food shortages and price spikes caused by weather extremes partly linked to climate change. Climate change will increase malnourished populations through direct impacts on food production and have cascading impacts on food prices and household incomes, all of which will reduce access to safe and nutritious food.

Extreme climate events will become more frequent and force some of the current food production areas beyond the safe climatic space for production (high confidence). Globally, 10% of the currently suitable area for major crops and livestock is projected to be climatically unsuitable in mid-century and 31–34% by the end of the century under SSP5-8.5. Adverse effects of climate change on food production will become more severe when global temperatures rise by more than 2°C. One study estimated that the heat stress from projected 3°C warming above baseline (1986–2005) would reduce labor capacity by 30–50% in Sub-Saharan Africa and Southeast Asia, leading to a 5% increase in crop prices due to higher labor costs and production losses, thereby undermining food availability, access, and livelihood. Thiault et al. (2019) projected that, by 2100, climate change under RCP8.5 could have negative impacts on both agriculture and marine fisheries productivity in countries where 90% of the world population live. A global analysis of shellfish aquaculture estimated that habitat suitability will decline beyond 2060 globally, but much sooner in some Asian countries. These negative effects in the second half of the century will be much less under RCP2.6.

Climate change impacts will increase the number of people at risk of hunger, ranging from 8 million people under SSP1 to 80 million people under SSP3 scenarios (RCP6.0) by 2050, compared to a world with no climate change. Nearly 80% of the population at risk of hunger is projected to reside in Africa and Asia. Risk projections beyond 2050 are limited, but hunger will likely increase in the latter half of the century, with more people at risk under RCP8.5 compared to RCP4.5. Regional disparity in hunger risk is also projected to grow, particularly under high-emission scenarios.

Climate change will increase the costs and management challenges of providing safe food. Food safety challenges will arise from contamination caused by the increased prevalence of pathogens, harmful algal blooms, and toxic bioaccumulation. Micronutrient deficiency is prevalent across many regions and will continue to be a problem, with significant implications for human health.

Food security and healthy, balanced diets will also be undermined by reduced livelihoods and health of people in agriculture and food-related sectors, diminished ecosystem services provided by pollinators, the soil biome, and water systems, and climate-mitigation-related policies that solely focus on reducing GHG emissions without considering their potential to increase competition with food production for scarce land and water.

SECOND TEXT: 
7.2. Observed Impacts,
with Detection and Attribution
7.2.1. Food Production Systems

Formal detection of impacts requires that observed changes be compared to a clearly specified baseline that characterizes behavior in the absence of climate change (Chapter 18). For food production systems, the number and strength of non-climate drivers, such as cultivar improvement or increased use of irrigation and fertilizers in the case of crops, make defining a clear baseline extremely difficult. Most non-climatic factors are not very well characterized in terms of spatial and temporal distributions, and the relationships between these factors and specific outcomes of interest (e.g., crop or fish production) are often difficult to quantify.

Attribution of any observed changes to climate trends are further complicated by the fact that models linking climate and agriculture must, implicitly or explicitly, make assumptions about farmer behavior. In most cases, models implicitly assume that farming practices or technologies did not adjust in response to climate over the period of interest. This assumption can be defended in some cases based on ancillary data on practices, or based on small differences between using models with and without adaptation (Schlenker and Roberts, 2009). However, in some instances the relationship between climate conditions and crop production has been shown to change over time because of management changes, such as introduction of irrigation or changes in
crop varieties (Zhang et al, 2008; Liu et al., 2009; Sakurai et al, 2012).

7.2.1.1. Crop Production  

Many studies of cropping systems have estimated impacts of observed climate changes on crop yields over the past half century, although they typically do not attempt to compare observed yields to a counterfactual baseline, and thus are not formal detection and attribution studies. These studies employ both mechanistic and statistical approaches (Section 7.3.1), and estimate impacts by running the models with observed historical climate and then computing trends in modeled outcomes. Based on these studies, there is medium confidence that climate trends have negatively affected wheat and maize production for many regions (Figure 7-2) (medium evidence, high agreement). Because many of these regional studies are for major producers, and a global study (Lobell et al., 2011a) estimated negative impacts on these crops, there is also medium confidence for negative impacts on global aggregate production of wheat and maize. Effects on rice and soybean yields have been small in major production regions and globally (Figure 7-2) (medium evidence, high agreement). There is also high confidence that warming has benefitted crop production in some high-latitude regions, such as northeast China or the UK (Jaggard et al., 2007; Chen et al., 2010; Supit et al, 2010; Gregory and Marshall, 2012).

More difficult to quantify with models is the impact of very extreme events on cropping systems, as by definition these occur very rarely and models cannot be adequately calibrated and tested. Table 18-3 lists some notable extremes over the past decade, and the impacts on cropping systems. Despite the difficulty of modeling the impacts of these events, they clearly have sizable impacts (Sanchez et al. 2014) that are apparent immediately or soon after the event, and therefore not easily confused with effects of more slowly moving factors. For a subset of these events, climate research has evaluated whether anthropogenic activity has increased or decreased their likelihood (Table 18-3).

A sizable fraction of crop modeling studies were concerned with production for individual sites or provinces, spatial scales below which  the changes in climate conditions are attributable to anthropogenic activity (WGI AR5 Chapter 10). Similarly, most crop studies have focused on the past few decades, a time scale shorter than most attribution studies for climate. However, some focused on continental or global scales (Lobell and Field, 2007; You et al., 2009; Lobell et al., 2011a), at which trends in several climatic variables, including average summer temperatures, have been attributed to anthropogenic activity. In particular, global temperature trends over the past few decades are attributable to human activity (WGI AR5 Chapter 10), and the studies discussed above indicate that this warming has had significant impacts on global yield trends of some crops.

In general, little work in food production or food security research has focused on determining whether climate trends affecting agriculture can be attributed to anthropogenic influence on the climate system. However, as the field of climate detection and attribution proceeds to finer spatial and temporal scales, and as agricultural modeling studies expand to broader scales, there should be many opportunities to link climate and crop studies in the next few years. Importantly, climate attribution is increasingly documented not only for measures of average conditions over growing seasons, but also for extremes. For instance, Min et al. (2011) attributed changes in rainfall extremes for 1951-1999 to anthropogenic activity, and these are widely acknowledged as important to cropping systems (Rosenzweig et al., 2002). Frost damage is an important constraint on crop growth in many crops, including for various high-value crops, and significant reductions in frost occurrence since 1961 have been observed and attributed to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in nearly every region of the world (Zwiers et al, 2011; IPCC, 2012).

Increased frequency of unusually hot nights since 1961 are also attributable to human activity in most regions (WGI AR5 Chapter 10). These events are damaging to most crops, an effect that has been observed most commonly for rice yields (Peng et al., 2004; Wassmann et al., 2009; Welch et al., 2010) as well as rice quality (Okada et al., 2011). Extremely high daytime temperatures are also damaging and occasionally lethal to crops (Porter and Gawith, 1999; Schlenker and Roberts, 2009), and trends at the global scale in annual maximum daytime temperatures since 1961 have been attributed to GHG emissions (Zwiers et al., 2011). At regional and local scales, however, trends in daytime maximum are harder to attribute to GHG emissions because of the prominent role of soil moisture and clouds in driving these trends (Christidis et al., 2005; Zwiers et al., 2011).

In addition to effects of changes in climatic conditions, there are clear effects of changes in atmospheric composition on crops. Increase of atmospheric CO, by greater than 100 ppm since preindustrial times has virtually certainly enhanced water use efficiency and yields, especially for C; crops such as wheat and rice, although these benefits played a minor role in driving overall yield trends (Amthor, 2001; McGrath and Lobell, 2011).

Emissions of CO, often are accompanied by ozone (0;) precursors that have driven a rise in tropospheric O, that harms crop yields (Morgan et al., 2006; Mills et al., 2007; Section 7.3.2.1.2). Elevated 0, since preindustrial times has very likely suppressed global production of major crops compared to what they would have been without O, increases, with estimated losses of roughly 10% for wheat and soybean and 3 to 5% for maize and rice (Van Dingenen et al., 2009). Impacts are most severe over India and China (Van Dingenen et al., 2009; Avnery et al. 2011a,b), but are also evident for soybean and maize in the USA (Fishman et al., 2010).

7.2.1.2. Fisheries Production

The global average consumption of fish and other products from fisheries and aquaculture in 2010 was 18.6 kg per person per year, derived from a total production of 148.5 million tonnes, of which 86% was used for direct human consumption. The total production arose from contributions of 77.4 and 11.2 million tonnes respectively from marine and inland capture fisheries, and 18.1 and 41.7 million tonnes respectively from marine and freshwater aquaculture (FAO, 2012). Fisheries make particular contributions to food security and more than 90% of the people engaged in the sector are employed in small-scale fisheries, many of whom are found in the poorer countries of the world (Cochrane et al., 2011). The detection and attribution of impacts are as confounded in inland and marine fisheries as in terrestrial food production systems. Overfishing, habitat modification, pollution, and interannual to decadal climate variability can all have impacts that are difficult to separate from those directly attributable to climate change.

One of the best studied areas is the Northeast Atlantic, where the temperature has increased rapidly in recent decades, associated with a poleward shift in distribution of fish (Perry et al., 2005; Brander, 2007; Cheung et al., 2010, 2013). There is high confidence in observations of increasing abundance of fish species in the northern extent of their ranges while decreases in abundance have occurred in the southern part (Section 30.5.1.1.1). These trends will have mixed implications for fisheries and aquaculture with some commercial species negatively and others positively affected (Cook and Heath, 2005). There is a similar well-documented example in the oceans off southeast Australia with large warming trends associated with more southward incursion of the Eastern Australian Current, resulting in southward migration of marine species into the oceans around eastern Tasmania (robust evidence, high agreement; Last et al., 2011).

As a further example, coral reef ecosystems provide food and other resources to more than 500 million people and with an annual value of US$5 billion or more (Munday et al., 2008; Hoegh-Guldberg, 2011). More than 60% of coral reefs are considered to be under immediate threat of damage from a range of local threats, of which overfishing is the most serious (Burke et al., 2011; see also Box CC-CR) and the percentage under threat rises to approximately 75% when the effect of rising ocean temperatures is added to these local impacts (Burke et al., 2011). Wilson et al. (2006) demonstrated that declines in coral reef cover typically led to declines in abundance of the majority of fish species associated with coral reefs. There is high confidence that the availability of fish and invertebrate species associated with coral reefs that are important in many tropical coastal fisheries is very likely to be reduced (Section 30.6.2.1.2). Other examples around the world are described in Section 30.5.1.1.1.

These changes are impacting marine fisheries: a recent study that examined the composition of global fisheries catches according to the inferred temperature preferences of the species caught in fisheries found that there had been changes in the species composition of marine capture fisheries catches and that these were significantly related to changes in ocean temperatures (Cheung et al. 2013; Section 6.4.1.1). These authors noted that the relative contribution to catches by warmer water species had increased at higher latitudes while the contributions of subtropical species had decreased in the tropics. These changes have negative implications for coastal fisheries in tropical developing countries, which tend to be particularly vulnerable to climate change (Cheung et al., 2013; Sections 6.4.3, 7.5.1.1.2). 

There is considerably less information available on climate change impacts on fisheries and fishery resources in freshwater systems and aquaculture. Considerable attention has been given to the impacts of climate change in some African lakes but with mixed interpretations (Section 22.3.3.1.4). There is evidence that increasing temperature has reduced the primary productivity of Lake Tanganyika in East Africa and a study by O'Reilly et al. (2003) estimated that this would have led to a decrease of approximately 30% in fish yields. However, Sarvala et al. (2006) disagreed and concluded that observed decreases in the fish catches could be explained by changed fishery practices. There has been a similar difference of opinion for Lake Kariba, where Ndebele-Murisa et al. (2011) argued that a reduction in fisheries productivity had been caused by climate change while Marshall (2012) argued that the declines in fish catches can only have been caused by fishing. There is medium confidence that, in India, changes in a number of climate variables including an increase in air temperature, regional monsoon variation, and a regional increase in incidence of severe storms have led to changes in species composition in the River Ganga and to have reduced the availability of fish spawn for aquaculture in the river Ganga while having positive impacts on aquaculture on the plains through bringing forward and extending the breeding period of the majors carps (Vass et al., 2009).

7.2.1.3. Livestock Production

In comparison to crop and fish production, considerably less work has been published on observed impacts for other food production systems, such as livestock or aquaculture, and to our knowledge nothing has been published for hunting or collection of wild foods other than for capture fisheries. The relative lack of evidence reflects a lack of study in this topic, but not necessarily a lack of real-world impacts of observed climate trends. A study of blue-tongue virus, an important ruminant disease, evaluated the effects of past and future climate trends on transmission risk, and concluded that climate changes have facilitated the recent and rapid spread of the virus into Europe (Guis et al., 2012). Ticks that carry zoonotic diseases have also likely changed distribution as a consequence of past climate trends (Section 23.4.2).

7.2.2. Food Security and Food Prices

Food production is an important aspect of food security (Section 7.1), and the evidence that climate change has affected food production implies some effect on food security. Yet quantifying this effect is an extremely difficult task, requiring assumptions about the many non- climate factors that interact with climate to determine food security. There is thus limited direct evidence that unambiguously links climate change to impacts on food security.

One important aspect of food security is the prices of internationally traded food commodities (Section 7.1.3). These prices reflect the overall balance of supply and demand, and the accessibility of food for consumers integrated with regional to global markets. Although food prices gradually declined for most of the 20th century (FAO, 2009b) since AR4 there have been several periods of rapid increases in international food prices (Figure 7-3). A major factor in recent price changes has been increased crop demand, notably via increased use in biofuel production related both to energy policy mandates and oil price fluctuations (Roberts and Schlenker, 2010; Mueller et al., 2011; Wright, 2011). Yet fluctuations and trends in food production are also widely believed to have played a role in recent price changes, with recent price spikes often following climate extremes in major producers (Figure 7-3). Moreover, some of these extreme events have become more likely as a result of climate trends (Table 18-3). Domestic policy reactions can also amplify international price responses to weather events, as was the case with export bans announced by several countries since 2007 (FAO, 2008). In a study of global production responses to climate trends (Lobell et al, 2011a) estimated a price increase of 19% due to the impacts of temperature and precipitation trends on supply, or an increase of 6% once the beneficial yield effects of increased CO, over the study period were considered. Because the price models were developed for a period ending in 2003, these estimates do not account for the policy responses witnessed in recent years which have amplified the price responses to weather.