AR5

Chapter 11.3
For the 21st century, the AR4 and the SREX concluded that heavy pre- cipitation events were likely to increase in many areas of the globe (IPCC, 2007). Since AR4, a larger number of additional studies have been published using global and regional climate models (Fowler et al., 2007; Gutowski et al., 2007; Sun et al., 2007; Im et al., 2008; O’Gorman and Schneider, 2009; Xu et al., 2009; Hanel and Buishand, 2011; Hein- rich and Gobiet, 2011; Meehl et al., 2012b). For the near term, CMIP5 global projections (Figure 11.17c) confirm a clear tendency for increas- es in heavy precipitation events in the global mean, but there are sig- nificant variations across regions (Sillmann et al., 2013). Past observa- tions have also shown that interannual and decadal variability in mean and heavy precipitation are large, and are in addition strongly affected by internal variability (e.g., El Niño), volcanic forcing and anthropogen- ic aerosol loads (see Section 2.3.1). In general models have difficulties in representing these variations, particularly in the tropics (see Section 9.5.4.2). Thus the frequency and intensity of heavy precipitation events will likely increase over many land areas in the near term, but this trend will not be apparent in all regions, because of natural variability and possible influences of anthropogenic aerosols.
Simulations with regional climate models demonstrate that the response in terms of heavy precipitation events to anthropogenic cli- mate change may become evident in some but not all regions in the near term. For instance, ENSEMBLES projections for Europe (see Figure 11.18e–h) confirm the previous IPCC results that changes in mean precipitation as well as heavy precipitation events are characterized by a pronounced north–south gradient in the extratropics, especially in the winter season, with precipitation increases in the higher lati- tudes and decreases in the subtropics. Although this pattern starts to emerge in the near term, the projected changes are statistically signif- icant only in a fraction of the domain. The results are affected by both changes in water vapour content as induced by large-scale warming and large-scale circulation changes. Figure 11.18e–h also shows that mid- and high-latitude projections for changes in DJF extremes and means are qualitatively similar in the near term, at least for the event size considered.
Previous work reviewed in AR4 has established that extreme precipitation events may increase substantially stronger than mean precipitation amounts. More specifically, extreme events may increase with the atmospheric water vapour content, that is, up to the rate of the Clausius–Clapeyron (CC) relationship (e.g., Allen and Ingram, 2002). More recent work suggests that increases beyond this threshold may occur for short-term events associated with thunderstorms (Len- derink and Van Meijgaard, 2008; Lenderink and Meijgaard, 2010) and tropical convection (O’Gorman, 2012). A number of studies showed strong dependencies on location and season, but confirm the exist- ence of significant deviations from the CC scaling (e.g., Lenderink et al., 2011; Mishra et al., 2012; Berg et al., 2013). Studies with cloud-re- solving models generally support the existence of temperature-precip- itation relations that are close to or above (up to about twice) the CC relation (Muller et al., 2011; Singleton and Toumi, 2012).

Chapter 2.6.2
2.6.2 Extremes of the Hydrological Cycle
In Section 2.5 mean state changes in different aspects of the hydrological cycle are discussed. In this section we focus on the more extreme aspects of the cycle including extreme rainfall, severe local weather events like hail, flooding and droughts. Extreme events associated with tropical and extratropical storms are discussed in Sections 2.6.3 and 2.6.4 respectively.
2.6.2.1 Precipitation Extremes
AR4 concluded that substantial increases are found in heavy precipitation events. It was likely that annual heavy precipitation events had disproportionately increased compared to mean changes between 1951 and 2003 over many mid-latitude regions, even where there had been a reduction in annual total precipitation. Rare precipitation (such as the highest annual daily precipitation total) events were likely to have increased over regions with sufficient data since the late 19th century. SREX supported this view, as have subsequent analyses, but noted large spatial variability within and between regions (Table 3.2 of Seneviratne et al., 2012).
Given the diverse climates across the globe, it has been difficult to provide a universally valid definition of ‘extreme precipitation’. However, Box 2.4 Table 1 indicates some of the common definitions that are used in the scientific literature. In general, statistical tests indicate changes in precipitation extremes are consistent with a wetter climate (Sec- tion 7.6.5), although with a less spatially coherent pattern of change than temperature, in that there are large areas that show increasing trends and large areas that show decreasing trends and a lower level of statistical significance than for temperature change (Alexander et al., 2006; Donat et al., 2013a, 2013c). Using R95p and SDII indices (Box 2.4), Figures 2.33a and 2.33b show these areas for heavy precipitation amounts and precipitation intensity where sufficient data are available in the HadEX2 data set (Donat et al., 2013c) although there are more areas showing significant increases than decreases. Although chang- es in large-scale circulation patterns have a substantial influence on precipitation extremes globally (Alexander et al., 2009; Kenyon and Hegerl, 2010), Westra et al. (2013) showed, using in situ data over land, that trends in the wettest day of the year indicate more increases than would be expected by chance. Over the tropical oceans satellite meas- urements show an increase in the frequency of the heaviest rainfall during warmer (El Niño) years (Allan and Soden, 2008).
Regional trends in precipitation extremes since the middle of the 20th century are varied (Table 2.13). In most continents confidence in trends is not higher than medium except in North America and Europe where there have been likely increases in either the frequency or intensity of heavy precipitation. This assessment increases to very likely for cen- tral North America. For North America it is also likely that increases
have occurred during the whole of the 20th century (Pryor et al., 2009; Donat et al., 2013c; Villarini et al., 2013). For South America the most recent integrative studies indicate heavy rain events are increasing in frequency and intensity over the contient as a whole (Donat et al., 2013c; Skansi et al., 2013). For Europe and the Mediterranean, the assessment masks some regional and seasonal variation. For example, much of the increase reported in Table 2.13 is found in winter although with decreasing trends in some other regions such as northern Italy, Poland and some Mediterranean coastal sites (Pavan et al., 2008; Lupi- kasza, 2010; Toreti et al., 2010). There are mixed regional trends across Asia and Oceania but with some indication that increases are being observed in more regions than decreases while recent studies focused on Africa, in general, have not found significant trends in extreme pre- cipitation (see Chapter 14 for more on regional variations and trends).
The above studies generally use indices which reflect ‘moderate’ extremes, for example, events occurring as often as 5% or 10% of the time (Box 2.4). Only a few regions have sufficient data to assess trends in rarer precipitation events reliably, for example, events occurring on average once in several decades. Using Extreme Value Theory, DeGae- tano (2009) showed a 20% reduction in the return period for extreme precipitation events over large parts of the contiguous USA from 1950 to 2007. For Europe from 1951 to 2010, Van den Besselaar et al. (2012) reported a median reduction in 5- to 20-year return periods of 21%, with a range between 2% and 58% depending on the subregion and season. This decrease in return times for rare extremes is qualitatively similar to the increase in moderate extremes for these regions reported above, and also consistent with earlier local results for the extreme tail of the distribution reported in AR4.
The aforementioned studies refer to daily precipitation extremes, although rainfall will often be limited to part of the day only. The litera- ture on sub-daily scales is too limited for a global assessment although it is clear that analysis and framing of questions regarding sub-daily precipitation extremes is becoming more critical (Trenberth, 2011). Available regional studies have shown results that are even more com- plex than for daily precipitation and with variations in the spatial pat- terns of trends depending on event formulation and duration. However, regional studies show indications of more increasing than decreasing trends (Sen Roy, 2009; for India) (Sen Roy and Rouault, 2013; for South Africa) (Westra and Sisson, 2011; for Australia). Some studies present evidence of scaling of sub-daily precipitation with temperature that is outside that expected from the Clausius–Clapeyron relation (about 7% per degree Celsius) (Lenderink and Van Meijgaard, 2008; Haerter et al., 2010; Jones et al., 2010; Lenderink et al., 2011; Utsumi et al., 2011), but scaling beyond that expected from thermodynamic theories is controversial (Section 7.6.5).
In summary, further analyses continue to support the AR4 and SREX conclusions that it is likely that since 1951 there have been statistically significant increases in the number of heavy precipitation events (e.g., above the 95th percentile) in more regions than there have been sta- tistically significant decreases, but there are strong regional and sub- regional variations in the trends. In particular, many regions present statistically non-significant or negative trends, and, where seasonal changes have been assessed, there are also variations between seasons (e.g., more consistent trends in winter than in summer in Europe). The overall most consistent trends towards heavier precipitation events are found in central North America (very likely increase) but assessment for Europe shows likely increases in more regions than decreases.

10.6.1.2 Precipitation Extremes
Observations have showed a general increase in heavy precipitation at the global scale. This appears to be consistent with the expected response to anthropogenic forcing as a result of an enhanced moisture content in the atmosphere but a direct cause-and-effect relationship between changes in external forcing and extreme precipitation had not been established at the time of the AR4. As a result, the AR4 con- cluded that increases in heavy precipitation were more likely than not consistent with anthropogenic influence during the latter half of the 20th century (Hegerl et al., 2007b).
Extreme precipitation is expected to increase with warming. A com- bination of evidence leads to this conclusion though by how much remains uncertain and may vary with time scale (Section 7.6.5). Obser- vations and model projected future changes both indicate increase in extreme precipitation associated with warming. Analysis of observed annual maximum 1-day precipitation (RX1day) over global land areas with sufficient data smaples indicates a significant increase in extreme percipitation globally, with a median increase about 7% °C–1 GMST increase (Westra et al., 2013). CMIP3 and CMIP5 simulations project an increase in the globally averaged 20-year return values of annual maximum 24-hour precipitation amounts of about 6 to 7% with each degree Celsius of global mean warming, with the bulk of models sim- ulating values in the range of 4 to 10% °C–1(Kharin et al., 2007; Kharin et al., 2013). Anthropogenic influence has been detected on various
aspects of the global hydrological cycle (Stott et al., 2010), which is directly relevant to extreme precipitation changes. An anthropogen- ic influence on increasing atmospheric moisture content has been detected (see Section 10.3.2). A higher moisture content in the atmos- phere would be expected to lead to stronger extreme precipitation as extreme precipitation typically scales with total column moisture if cir- culation does not change. An observational analysis shows that winter maximum daily precipitation in North America has statistically signifi- cant positive correlations with local atmospheric moisture (Wang and Zhang, 2008).
There is only a modest body of direct evidence that natural or anthro- pogenic forcing has affected global mean precipitation (see Section 10.3.2 and Figure 10.10), despite a robust expectation of increased precipitation (Balan Sarojini et al., 2012 ) and precipitation extremes (see Section 7.6.5). However, mean precipitation is expected to increase less than extreme precipitation because of energy constraints (e.g., Allen and Ingram, 2002). A perfect model analysis with an ensem- ble of GCM simulations shows that anthropogenic influence should be detectable in precipitation extremes in the second half of the 20th century at global and hemispheric scales, and at continental scale as well but less robustly (Min et al., 2008c), see also Hegerl et al. (2004). One study has also linked the observed intensification of precipitation extremes (including RX1day and annual maximum 5-day precipitation (RX5day)) over NH land areas to human influence using a limited set of climate models and observations (Min et al., 2011). However, the detection was less robust if using the fingerprint for combined anthro- pogenic and natural influences compared to that for anthropogenic influences only, possibly due to a number of factors including weak S/N ratio and uncertainties in observation and model simulations. Also, models still have difficulties in simulating extreme daily precipitation directly comparable with those observed at the station level, which has been addressed to some extent by Min et al. (2011) by independently transforming annual precipitation extremes in models and observations onto a dimensionless scale that may be more comparable between the two. Detection of anthropogenic influence on smaller spatial scales is more difficult due to the increased level of noise and uncertainties and confounding factors on local scales. Fowler and Wilby (2010) sug- gested that there may have only been a 50% likelihood of detecting anthropogenic influence on UK extreme precipitation in winter at that time, and a very small likelihood of detecting it in other seasons.
Given the evidence of anthropogenic influence on various aspects of the global hydrological cycle that implies that extreme precipitation would be expected to have increased and some limited direct evidence of anthropogenic influence on extreme precipitation, but given also the difficulties in simulating extreme precipitation by climate models and limited observational coverage, we assess, consistent with SREX (Sen- eviratne et al., 2012) that there is medium confidence that anthropo- genic forcing has contributed to a global scale intensification of heavy precipitation over the second half of the 20th century in land regions where observational coverage is sufficient for assessment.

12.4.5.2 Patterns of Projected Average Precipitation Changes
Global mean precipitation changes have been presented in Section 12.4.1.1. The processes that govern large-scale changes in precipita- tion are presented in Section 7.6, and are used here to interpret the projected changes in RCP scenarios. Changes in precipitation extremes are presented in Section 12.4.5.5. Further discussion of regional chang- es, in particular the monsoon systems, is presented in Chapter 14.
Figure 12.22 shows the CMIP5 multi-model average percentage change in seasonal mean precipitation in the middle of the 21st century, at the end of the 21st century and at the end of the 22nd century for the RCP8.5 scenario relative to the 1986–2005 average. Precipitation changes for all the scenarios are shown in Annex I Sup- plementary Material and scale approximately with the global mean temperature (Section 12.4.2). In many regions, changes in precipitation exhibit strong seasonal characteristics so that, in regions where the sign of the precipitation changes varies with the season, the annual mean values (Figure 12.10) may hide some of these seasonal changes, resulting in weaker confidence than seasonal mean values (Chou et al., 2013; Huang et al., 2013).
The patterns of multi-model precipitation changes displayed in Figure 12.22 tend to smooth and decrease the spatial contrast of precip- itation changes simulated by each model, in particular over regions where model results disagree. Thus the amplitude of the multi-model ensemble mean precipitation response significantly underestimates the median amplitude computed from each individual model (Neelin et al., 2006; Knutti et al., 2010a). The CMIP3/5 multi-model ensemble precipitation projections must be interpreted in the context of uncer- tainty. Multi-model projections are not probabilistic statements about the likelihood of changes. Maps of multi-model projected changes are smoothly varying but observed changes are and will continue to be much more granular.
To analyze the patterns of projected precipitation changes, a useful framework consists in decomposing them into a part that is related to atmospheric circulation changes and a part that is related mostly to water vapour changes, referred to as dynamical and thermodynamical components, respectively. However, the definition of these two com- ponents may differ among studies. At the time of the AR4, the robust changes of the difference between precipitation and evaporation (P – E) were interpreted as a wet-get-wetter and dry-get-drier type of response (Mitchell et al., 1987; Chou and Neelin, 2004; Held and Soden, 2006). The theoretical background, which is more relevant over oceans than over land, is that the lower-tropospheric water vapour increase with temperature enhances the moisture transported by the circulation. This leads to additional moisture convergence within the convergence zones and to additional moisture divergence in the descent zones, increasing the contrast in precipitation minus evapo- ration values between moisture convergence and divergence regions. A weakening of the tropical overturning circulation (see Section 12.4.4.2) partially opposes this thermodynamic response (Chou and Neelin, 2004; Held and Soden, 2006; Vecchi and Soden, 2007; Chou et al., 2009; Seager et al., 2010; Allan, 2012; Bony et al., 2013). At the regional scale the dynamic response may be larger than the thermo- dynamic response, and this has been analyzed in more detail since the AR4 (Chou et al., 2009; Seager et al., 2010; Xie et al., 2010; Muller and O’Gorman, 2011; Chadwick et al., 2012; Scheff and Frierson, 2012; Bony et al., 2013; Ma and Xie, 2013). Over continents, this simple wet- get-wetter and dry-get-drier type of response fails for some important regions such as the Amazon. At the global scale, the net water vapour
transport from oceans to land increases, and therefore the average P – E over continents also increases (Liepert and Previdi, 2012).
In the mid and high latitudes, a common feature across generations of climate models is a simulated increased precipitation. The thermody- namical component explains most of the projected increase (Emori and Brown, 2005; Seager et al., 2010). This is consistent with theoretical explanations assuming fixed atmospheric flow patterns but increased water vapour in the lower troposphere (Held and Soden, 2006). In addi- tion to this thermodynamical effect, water transport may be modified by the poleward shift of the storm tracks and by the increase of their intensity (Seager et al., 2010; Wu et al., 2011b), although confidence in such changes in storm tracks may not be high (see Section 12.4.4). On seasonal time scales, the minimum and maximum values of precipita- tion both increase, with a larger increase of the maximum and there- fore an increase of the annual precipitation range (Seager et al., 2010; Chou and Lan, 2012). In particular, the largest changes over northern Eurasia and North America are projected to occur during winter. At high latitudes of the NH, the precipitation increase may lead to an increase of snowfall in the colder regions and a decrease of snowfall in the warmer regions due to the decreased number of freezing days (see Section 12.4.6.2).
Most models simulate a large increase of the annual mean precipita- tion over the equatorial ocean and an equatorward shift of the Inter- tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ), in both summer and winter seasons, that are mainly explained by atmospheric circulation changes (Chou et al., 2009; Seager et al., 2010; Sobel and Camargo, 2011). The chang- es of the atmospheric circulation have different origins. Along the margins of the convection zones, spatial inhomogeneities, including local convergence feedback or the rate at which air masses from dry regions tend to flow into the convection zone, can yield a considerable sensitivity in precipitation response (Chou et al., 2006; Neelin et al., 2006). Along the equator, atmosphere–ocean interactions yield to a maximum of SST warming and a large precipitation increase there (Xie et al., 2010; Ma and Xie, 2013). Model studies with idealized configu- rations suggest that tropical precipitation changes should be interpret- ed as responses to changes of the atmospheric energy budget rather than responses to changes of SST (Kang and Held, 2012). All of these atmospheric circulation changes, and therefore precipitation changes, can differ considerably from model to model. This is the case over both ocean and land. For instance, the spread of model projections in the Sahel region, West Africa, is large in both the CMIP3 and CMIP5 mul- ti-model data base (Roehrig et al., 2013).
In the subtropical dry regions, there is a robust decrease of P – E that is accounted for by the thermodynamic contribution (Chou and Neelin, 2004; Held and Soden, 2006; Chou et al., 2009; Seager et al., 2010; Bony et al., 2013). Over ocean, the spatial heterogeneity of temperature increase impacts the lower-tropospheric water vapour increase, which impacts both the thermodynamic and the dynamic responses (Xie et al., 2010; Ma and Xie, 2013). In addition, the pattern of precipitation changes in dry regions may be different from that of P – E because the contribution of evaporation changes can be as large (but of opposite sign) as the moisture transport changes (Chou and Lan, 2012; Scheff and Frierson, 2012; Bony et al., 2013). This is especially the case over the subsidence regions during the warm season over land where the agreement between models is the smallest (Chou et al., 2009; Allan, 2012). A robust feature is the decline of precipitation on the poleward flanks of the subtropical dry zones as a consequence of the Hadley Cell expansion, with possible additional decrease from a poleward shift of the mid latitude storm tracks (Seager et al., 2010; Scheff and Frierson, 2012). On seasonal time scales, the minimum and the maximum values of precipitation both increase, with a larger increase of the maximum and therefore an increase of the annual precipitation range (Sobel and Camargo, 2011; Chou and Lan, 2012).
Long-term precipitation changes are driven mainly by the increase of the surface temperature, as presented above, but other factors also contribute to them. Recent studies suggest that CO2 increase has a sig- nificant direct influence on atmospheric circulation, and therefore on global and tropical precipitation changes (Andrews et al., 2010; Bala et al., 2010; Cao et al., 2012; Bony et al., 2013). Over the ocean, the pos- itive RF from increased atmospheric CO2 reduces the radiative cooling
of the troposphere and the large scale rising motion and hence reduc- es precipitation in the convective regions. Over large landmasses, the direct effect of CO2 on precipitation is the opposite owing to the small thermal inertia of land surfaces (Andrews et al., 2010; Bala et al., 2010; Cao et al., 2012; Bony et al., 2013). Regional precipitation changes are also influenced by aerosol and ozone (Ramanathan et al., 2001; Allen et al., 2012; Shindell et al., 2013a) through both local and large-scale processes, including changes in the circulation. Stratospheric ozone depletion contributes to the poleward expansion of the Hadley Cell and the related change of precipitation in the SH (Kang et al., 2011) whereas black carbon and tropospheric ozone increases are major con- tributors in the NH (Allen et al., 2012). Regional precipitation changes depend on regional forcings and on how models simulate their local and remote effects. Based on CMIP3 results, the inter-model spread of the estimate of precipitation changes over land is larger than the inter-scenario spread except in East Asia (Frieler et al., 2012). Projected precipitation changes vary greatly between models, much more so than for temperature projections. Part of this variance is due to genuine differences between the models including their ability to rep- licate observed precipitation patterns (see Section 9.4.1.1). However, a large part of it is also the result of the small ensemble size from each model (Rowell, 2012). This is especially true for regions of small pro- jected changes located between two regions: one experiencing signif- icant increases while the other experiences significant decreases. Indi- vidual climate model realizations will differ in their projection of future precipitation changes in these regions simply owing to their internal variability (Deser et al., 2012b; Deser et al., 2012a). Multi-model pro- jections containing large numbers of realizations would tend to feature small changes in these regions, and hatching in Figure 12.22 indicates regions where the projected multi-model mean change is less than one standard deviation of internal variability (method (a), Box 12.1). Confi- dence in projections in regions of limited or no change in precipitation may be more difficult to obtain than confidence in regions of large pro- jected changes. However, Power et al. (2012) and Tebaldi et al. (2011) show that for some of the regions featuring small multi-model average projected changes, effective consensus in projections may be better than the metrics reported in AR4 would imply.
Since the AR4, progress has been made in the understanding of the processes that control large scale precipitation changes. There is high confidence that the contrast of seasonal mean precipitation between dry and wet regions will increase in a warmer climate over most of the globe although there may be regional exceptions to this general pattern. This response is particularly robust when considering P – E changes as a function of atmospheric dynamical regimes. However, it is important to note that significant exceptions can occur in specific regions especially along the equator and on the poleward edges of the subtropical dry zone. In these regions, atmospheric circulation changes lead to shifts of the precipitation patterns. There is high confidence that the contrast between wet and dry seasons will increase over most of the globe as temperatures increase. Over the mid- and high-latitude regions, projected precipitation increases in winter are larger than in summer. Over most of the subtropical oceans, projected precipitation increases in summer are larger than in winter.
The changes in precipitation shown in Figure 12.22 exhibit patterns that become more pronounced and confidence in them increases as temperatures increase. More generally, the spatial and temporal changes in precipitation between two scenarios or within two peri- ods of a given scenario exhibit the pattern scaling behavior and lim- itations described in Section 12.4.2. The patterns and the associated multi-model spreads in CMIP5 for the RCP scenarios are very similar to those in CMIP3 for the SRES scenarios discussed in the AR4, with the projections in CMIP5 being slightly more consistent over land than those from CMIP3 (Knutti and Sedláček, 2013). The largest percentage changes are at the high latitudes. By the end of the 21st century, over the large northern land masses, increased precipitation is likely under the RCP8.5 scenario in the winter and spring poleward of 50°N. The robustness across scenarios, the magnitude of the projected changes versus natural variability and physical explanations described above yield high confidence that the projected changes would be larger than natural 20-year variations (see Box 12.1). In the tropics, precipitation changes exhibit strong regional contrasts, with increased precipitation
over the equatorial Pacific and Indian Oceans and decreases over much of the subtropical ocean. However, decreases are not projected to be larger than natural 20-year variations anywhere until the end of this century under the RCP8.5 scenario. Decreased precipitation in the Mediterranean, Caribbean and Central America, southwestern United States and South Africa is likely under the RCP8.5 scenario and is pro- jected with medium confidence to be larger than natural variations by the end of the 22nd century in some seasons (Box 12.1). The CMIP3 models’ historical simulations of zonal mean precipitation trends were shown to underestimate observed trends (Gillett et al., 2004; Lambert et al., 2005; Zhang et al., 2007; Liepert and Previdi, 2009) (see Section 10.3.2.2). Therefore it is more likely than not that the magnitude of the projected future changes in Figure 12.22 based on the multi-model mean is underestimated. Observational uncertainties including limited global coverage and large natural variability, in addition to challenges in precipitation modelling, limit confidence in assessment of climatic changes in precipitation.

12.4.5.5 Extreme Events in the Water Cycle
In addition to the changes in the seasonal pattern of mean precipitation described above, the distribution of precipitation events is projected to undergo profound changes (Gutowski et al., 2007; Sun et al., 2007; Boberg et al., 2010). At daily to weekly scales, a shift to more intense
individual storms and fewer weak storms is projected (Seneviratne et al., 2012). At seasonal or longer time scales, increased evapotranspira- tion over land can lead to more frequent and more intense periods of agricultural drought.
A general relationship between changes in total precipitation and extreme precipitation does not exist (Seneviratne et al., 2012). Two possible mechanisms controlling short-term extreme precipitation amounts are discussed at length in the literature and are similar to the thermodynamic and dynamical mechanisms detailed above for chang- es in average precipitation.
The first considers that extreme precipitation events occur when most of the available atmospheric water vapour rapidly precipitates out in a single storm. The maximum amount of water vapour in air (saturation) is determined by the Clausius–Clapeyron relationship. As air temper- ature increases, this saturated amount of water also increases (Allen and Ingram, 2002; Pall et al., 2007; Allan and Soden, 2008; Kendon et al., 2010). Kunkel et al. (2013) examined the CMIP5 model RCP4.5 and 8.5 projections for changes in maximum water vapour concentrations, a principal factor controlling the probable bound on maximum precipi- tation, concluding that maximum water vapour changes are compara- ble to mean water vapour changes but that the potential for changes in dynamical factors is less compelling. Such increases in atmospheric water vapour are expected to increase the intensity of individual pre- cipitation events, but have less impact on their frequency. As a result projected increases in extreme precipitation may be more reliable than similar projections of changes in mean precipitation in some regions (Kendon et al., 2010).
A second mechanism for extreme precipitation put forth by O’Gorman and Schneider (2009a, 2009b) is that such events are controlled by anomalous horizontal moisture flux convergence and associated con- vective updrafts which would change in a more complicated fashion in a warmer world (Sugiyama et al., 2010). Emori and Brown (2005) showed that the thermodynamic mechanism dominated over the dynamical mechanism nearly everywhere outside the tropical warm pool. However, Utsumi et al. (2011) used gridded observed daily data to find that daily extreme precipitation monotonically increases with temperature only at high latitudes, with the opposite behaviour in the tropics and a mix in the mid-latitudes. Li et al. (2011a) found that both mechanisms contribute to extreme precipitation in a high-res- olution aquaplanet model with updrafts as the controlling element in the tropics and air temperature controlling the mid-latitudes con- sistent with the results by Chou et al. (2012). Using a high-resolution regional model, Berg et al. (2009) found a seasonal dependence in Europe with the Clausius–Clapeyron relationship providing an upper limit to daily precipitation intensity in winter but water availability rather than storage capacity is the controlling factor in summer. Addi- tionally, Lenderink and Van Meijgaard (2008) found that very short (sub-daily) extreme precipitation events increase at a rate twice the amount predicted by Clausius–Clapeyron scaling in a very high-resolu- tion model over Europe suggesting that both mechanisms can interact jointly. Gastineau and Soden (2009) found in the CMIP3 models that the updrafts associated with the most extreme tropical precipitation events actually weaken despite an increase in the frequency of the heaviest rain rates further complicating simple mechanistic explana- tions. See also Sections 7.6.5 and 11.3.2.5.2.
Projections of changes in future extreme precipitation may be larger at the regional scales than for future mean precipitation, but natural variability is also larger causing a tendency for signal-to-noise ratios to decrease when considering increasingly extreme metrics. However, mechanisms of natural variability still are a large factor in assessing the robustness of projections (Kendon et al., 2008). In addition, large- scale circulation changes, which are uncertain, could dominate over the above mechanisms depending on the rarity and type of events consid- ered. However, analysis of CMIP3 models suggests circulation changes are potentially insufficient to offset the influence of increasing atmos- pheric water vapour on extreme precipitation change over Europe at least on large spatial scales (Kendon et al., 2010). An additional shift of the storm track has been shown in models with a better representation of the stratosphere, and this is found to lead to an enhanced increase in extreme rainfall over Europe in winter (Scaife et al., 2012).
Similar to temperature extremes (Section 12.4.3.3), the definition of a precipitation extreme depends very much on context and is often used in discussion of particular climate-related impacts (Seneviratne et al. (2012), Box 3.1). Consistently, climate models project future epi- sodes of more intense precipitation in the wet seasons for most of the land areas, especially in the NH and its higher latitudes, and the mon- soon regions of the world, and at a global average scale. The actual magnitude of the projected change is dependent on the model used,but there is strong agreement across the models over the direction of change (Tebaldi et al., 2006; Goubanova and Li, 2007; Chen and Knut- son, 2008; Haugen and Iversen, 2008; May, 2008b; Kysely and Berano- va, 2009; Min et al., 2011; Sillmann et al., 2013). Regional details are less robust in terms of the relative magnitude of changes but remain in good accord across models in terms of the sign of the change and the large-scale geographical patterns (Meehl et al., 2005a; CCSP, 2008a). In semi-arid regions of the midlatitudes and subtropics such as the Medi- terranean, the southwest USA, southwestern Australia, southern Africa and a large portion of South America, the tendency manifested in the majority of model simulations is for longer dry periods and is consist- ent with the average decreases shown in Figure 12.22. Figure 12.26 shows projected percent changes in RX5day, the annual maximum of consecutive 5-day precipitation over land regions obtained from the CMIP5 models (Box 2.4, Table 1). Globally averaged end of 21st centu- ry changes over land range from 5% (RCP2.6) to 20% (RCP8.5) more precipitation during very wet 5-day periods. Results from the CMIP3 models are shown for comparison (see Section 12.4.9). Locally, the few regions where this index of extreme precipitation decreases in the late 21st century RCP8.5 projection coincide with areas of robust decreases in the mean precipitation of Figure 12.22. 
Drought is discussed extensively in the SREX report (Seneviratne et al., 2012) and the conclusions about future drought risk described there based on CMIP3 models are reinforced by the CMIP5 models. As noted in the SREX reports, assessments of changes in drought characteristics with climate change should be made in the context of specific impacts questions. The risk of future agricultural drought episodes is increased in the regions of robust soil moisture decrease described in Section 12.4.5.3 and shown in Figure 12.23. Other measures in the literature of future agricultural drought are largely focussed on the Palmer Drought Severity Index (Wehner et al., 2011; Schwalm et al., 2012; Dai, 2013) and project ‘extreme’ drought as the normal climatological state by the end of the 21st century under the high emission scenarios in many mid-latitude locations. However, this measure of agricultural drought has been criticized as overly sensitive to increased temperatures due to a simplified soil moisture model (Hoerling et al., 2012). The consecutive dry-day index (CDD) is the length of the longest period of consecutive days with precipitation less than 1 mm (Box 2.4, Table 1). CMIP5 pro- jected changes in CDD over the 2081–2100 period under the RCP8.5 scenario (relative to the 1981–2000 reference period in common with CMIP3) from the CMIP5 models are shown in Figure 12.26c and exhib- it patterns similar to projected changes in both precipitation and soil moisture (Sillmann et al., 2013). Substantial increases in this measure of meteorological drought are projected in the Mediterranean, Central America, Brazil, South Africa and Australia while decreases are project- ed in high northern latitudes.
Truly rare precipitation events can cause very significant impacts. The statistics of these events at the tails of the precipitation distribution are well described by Extreme Value (EV) Theory although there are sig- nificant biases in the direct comparison of gridded model output and actual station data (Smith et al., 2009). There is also strong evidence that model resolution plays a key role in replicating EV quantities esti- mated from gridded observational data, suggesting that high-resolu- tion models may provide somewhat more confidence in projection of changes in rare precipitation events (Fowler et al., 2007a; Wehner et al., 2011). Figure 12.27 shows the late 21st century changes per degree Celsius in local warming in 20-year return values of annual maximum daily precipitation relative to the late 20th century (left) and the asso- ciated return periods of late 20th century 20-year return values at the end of the 21st century from the CMIP5 models. Across future emission scenarios, the global average of the CMIP5 multi-model median return value sensitivity is an increase of 5.3% °C–1 (Kharin et al., 2013). The CMIP5 land average is close to the CMIP3 value of 4% °C–1 report- ed by Min et al. (2011) for a subset of CMIP3 models. Corresponding with this change, the global average of return periods of late 20th century 20-year return values is reduced from 20 years to 14 years for a 1°C local warming. Return periods are projected to be reduced by about 10 to 20% °C–1 over the most of the mid-latitude land masses with larger reductions over wet tropical regions (Kharin et al., 2013). Hence, extreme precipitation events will very likely be more intense and more frequent in these regions in a warmer climate. Reductions in return values (or equivalently, increases in return period) are confined to convergent oceanic regions where circulation changes have reduced the available water vapour.
Severe thunderstorms, associated with large hail, high winds, and tor- nadoes, are another example of extreme weather associated with the water cycle. The large-scale environments in which they occur are char- acterized by large Convective Available Potential Energy (CAPE) and deep tropospheric wind shear (Brooks et al., 2003; Brooks, 2009). Del Genio et al. (2007), Trapp et al. (2007, 2009), and Van Klooster and Roe- bber (2009) found a general increase in the energy and decrease in the shear terms from the late 20th century to the late 21st century over the USA using a variety of regional model simulations embedded in global model SRES scenario simulations. The relative change between these two competing factors would tend to favour more environments that would support severe thunderstorms, providing storms are initiated. Trapp et al. (2009), for example, found an increase in favourable thun- derstorm conditions for all regions of the USA east of the Rocky Moun- tains. Large variability in both the energy and shear terms means that statistical significance is not reached until late in the 21st century under high forcing scenarios. One way of assessing the possibility of a change in the frequency of future thunderstorms is to look at historical records of observed tornado, hail and wind occurrence with respect to the envi- ronmental conditions (Brooks, 2013). This indicates that an increase in the fraction of severe thunderstorms containing non-tornadic winds would be consistent with the model projections of increased energy and decreased shear, but there has not been enough research to make a firm conclusion regarding future changes in frequency or magnitude.
Less work has been done on projected changes outside of the USA. Marsh et al. (2009) found that mean energy decreased in the warm season in Europe while it increased in the cool season. Even though the energy decreases in the warm season, the number of days with favour- able environments for severe thunderstorms increases because of an increasing number of days with relatively large values of available energy. For Europe, with the Mediterranean Sea and Sahara Desert to the south, questions remain about changes in boundary layer moisture, a main driver of the energy term. Niall and Walsh (2005) examined changes in CAPE, which may be associated with hailstorm occurrence in southeastern Australia using a global model, and found little change under warmer conditions. Leslie et al. (2008) reconsidered the south- eastern Australia hail question by nesting models with 1 km horizontal grid spacing and using sophisticated microphysical parameterizations and found an increase in the frequency of large hail by 2050 under the SRES A1B scenario, but with extremely large internal variability in the environments and hail size.
Overall, for all parts of the world studied, the results are suggestive of a trend toward environments favouring more severe thunderstorms, but the small number of analyses precludes any likelihood estimate of this change.